Upgrading to 1.4
================

Upgrading from the Munin 1.2 series to 1.4 should be quite easy.

From Munin 1.2 in general
-------------------------

Based on comparisons of a few (very few) Munin installations on Linux
we see identical rrd file names, and rrd files are created and
structured the same way as before.  This ensures that your data
history is preserved.  Upgrading to 1.4 should therefore prove to be
straightforward and cause no data loss.

From Munin 1.2.6
----------------

There is one exception: If you have munin-nodes running 1.2.6 then
some of the plugins use short (truncated) field names.  Especially the
Linux df plugin will be using truncated fieldnames for some disk
devices.  This is due to a basing a bug fix on obsolete documentation.
The device names were limited to 19 characters, only the 19 last
characters of the device name was used.  This truncation is done by
the plugin on the node.  When the plugin/node is upgraded the
truncation stops.

There is no really reliable way to fix this or migrate automatically.
What you can do is install 1.4.0 on one node at a time, and for each
upgrade examine your rrd file names.  You should be able to identify
rrd files for the upgraded node that have nearly identical names.
Personally I would use a graphical file browser for this.  If you find
two files that should be one then the one with the longest filename
should be newest, and the one with the short file name should not have
been updated since the node upgrade.  Rename the file with the short
name so that it has the long name.

Solaris
-------

On Solaris the if_errcoll_ plugin is now called if_err_ to get the
name aligned with the other platforms.  You can simply rename the rrd
files.

